feat!: categories (#16534)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/configuration-options.md

Add to this object if you wish to define rules that apply only to PRs that update digests.

> ## docker

Reviewer: We're working on a new major version in the `v35` branch, so maybe this PR should target `v35`. Right now this PR targets `main`. I'll let the maintainers decide. 😉

Reviewer 2: v35

Add config here if you wish it to apply to Docker package managers Dockerfile and Docker Compose.
If instead you mean to apply settings to any package manager that updates using the Docker _datasource_, use a package rule instead, e.g.

```json
{
  "packageRules": [
    {
      "matchDatasources": ["docker"],
      "labels": ["docker-update"]
    }
  ]
}
```

> ## dotnet

Reviewer 2: If someone today configures:

```
{
  "dotnet": {
    "enabled": false
  }
}
```

Then it would completely disable the `nuget` manager from even trying to extract.

With this change, users will see the `nuget` manager matching/extracting but then anything which is extracted is then disabled?

Author: The validation would fail as categories are not allowed as top level objects.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it migrate?

Second, I think we still support using manager and datasource names as top level objects, don't we? Some of these languages like `docker` and `dotnet` could therefore be valid at the top level.

Author: Currently not. 

Yes, manager are supported on the top level, but I'm not aware that the we support datasources there. 🤔      
At least that is how interpret the [validation code](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/pull/16534/files#diff-aa68cda516aaa0c65459a20c907086b0e6b7e8a930a429f70ca5ed46cdcd5676L27)
Further there is no overlap between languages and managers.

Author: > Do I understand right that you're retaining the option to configure top-level manager objects, but not languages?

Yes, that's correct.

}
```

### matchCategories

> Use this field to restrict rules to a particular language. e.g.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to elaborate a little more on why the option says categories but then we refer to languages

}
```

> ### matchCategories

Reviewer 2: I think if we keep both `languages` and `categories` support at the same time then we need to document the differences/overlaps

Reviewer 2: We should also clarify if these packageRules are only applied *after* extract. e.g. people might try to configure something like `fileMatch`

The above will match all package names starting with `eslint` but exclude ones starting with `eslint-foo`.

### matchCategories

> Use `matchCategories` to restrict rules to a particular language or group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `matchCategories` to restrict rules to a particular language or group.
Matching is done using "any" logic, i.e. "match any of the following categories".
```

Matching is done using "any" logic, i.e. "match any of the following categories".

> The categories can be found in the [manager documentation](./modules/manager.md).

Reviewer 3: i think this link is now wrong

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning

> Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of a repository.
> You can not use `matchCategories` to stop processing a repository.
> You can still use `matchCategories` to stop or change updating the dependencies though.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of a repository.
    You can not use `matchCategories` to stop processing a repository.
    You can still use `matchCategories` to stop or change updating the dependencies though.
```

We should use four spaces here. The easy way to remember this is that the text should match the key-word for the admonition.

Or maybe Prettier messed up the formatting automatically... 😄

Author: 🤔  looks like my IDE removed it during cut and copy and I haven't realised it. 😄

> !!! warning
>     Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of a repository.
>     You can not use `matchCategories` to stop processing a repository.
>     You can still use `matchCategories` to stop or change updating the dependencies though.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! note
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of dependencies.
    You can't use `matchCategories` to prevent particular categories from being extracted, but you can use it after extraction to prevent them from being looked up or updated.
```

The above will match all package names starting with `eslint` but exclude ones starting with `eslint-foo`.

### matchCategories

Use `matchCategories` to restrict rules to a particular language or group.
Matching is done using "any" logic, i.e. "match any of the following categories".
The categories can be found in the [manager documentation](./modules/manager/index.md).

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! note
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of dependencies.

>     You can't use `matchCategories` to prevent particular categories from being extracted, but you can use it after extraction to prevent them from being looked up or updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you want to configure which managers are being extracted at all, use `enabledManagers` instead.
```

```json
{
  "packageRules": [
    {

>       "matchCategories": ["python"],
>       "enabled": false

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "matchCategories": ["python"],
      "addLabels": ["py"]
```

    }
  ]
}
```

### matchLanguages

Use this field to restrict rules to a particular language. e.g.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning
    `matchLanguages` is deprecated and will be removed in the future.
    Use `matchCategories` which provides a more fine-grained and broad matching possibility.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we remove and migrate it now?

}
```

### matchCategories

Use this field to restrict rules to a particular language or group. The categories can be found on the [manager documentation](./modules/manager.md). e.g.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied after extraction of a repository, therefore it can not be used to completely prevent analyzes of a repository.
    Still it can be used to prevent or change the renovation of dependencies.

```json
{
  "packageRules": [
    {
      "matchCategories": ["python"],
      "enabled": false
    }
  ]
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

In the above example, this rule will not prevent Renovate from extracting Python dependencies, but it will stop them from being updated.
If you wish to skip extraction altogether, you'd need to use a feature like `enabledManagers` instead.

```

}
```

### matchCategories

Use this field to restrict rules to a particular language or group. The categories can be found on the [manager documentation](./modules/manager.md). e.g.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied after extraction of a repository, therefore it can not be used to completely prevent analyzes of a repository.

>     Still it can be used to prevent or change the renovation of dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Still it can be used to prevent or change the updating of dependencies.
```

We should not create new verbs, as this confuses the reader.

```json
{
  "packageRules": [
    {
      "matchCategories": ["python"],
      "enabled": false
    }
  ]
}
```

In the above example, this rule will not prevent Renovate from extracting Python dependencies, but it will stop them from being updated.

> If you wish to skip extraction altogether, you'd need to use a feature like `enabledManagers` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you wish to skip extraction altogether, use a feature like `enabledManagers` instead.
```

We can simplify a bit here, and strengthen the recommendation.

}
```

> ### matchCategories

Reviewer: Move the new section for `matchCategories` upwards, so it's sorted A through Z:

- `matchCategories` -> first different letter is an C
- `matchLanguages` -> first different letter is an L

Use `matchCategories` to restrict rules to a particular language or group.
The categories can be found in the [manager documentation](./modules/manager.md).

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning

>     Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of a repository, therefore it can not be used to completely prevent analyzes of a repository.

Reviewer: This sentence feels too long for me. I think we can split it up, and find better words for:

> therefore it can not be used to completely prevent analyzes of a repository.

I think we mean something like this:

```suggestion
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied _after_ extraction of a repository.
    You can not use `matchCategories` to stop processing a repository.
```

Author: Sounds good to me!

>     Still it can be used to prevent or change the updating of dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can still use `matchCategories` to stop or change updating the dependencies though.
```

How about something like this?

Author: Sounds good to me!

Use this field to restrict rules to a particular language. e.g.

> <!-- prettier-ignore -->
> !!! warning
>   `matchLanguages` is deprecated and will be removed in the future.
>   Use `matchCategories` which provides a more fine-grained and broad matching possibility.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning
    `matchLanguages` is deprecated and will be removed in the future.
    Use `matchCategories` which provides a more fine-grained and broad matching possibility.
```

The admonition body text needs _four_ spaces from the start of the line. 😉

}
```

### matchCategories

Use this field to restrict rules to a particular language or group. The categories can be found on the [manager documentation](./modules/manager.md). e.g.

> <!-- prettier-ignore -->
> !!! warning
>   Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied after extraction of a repository, therefore it can not be used to completely prevent analyzes of a repository.
>   Still it can be used to prevent or change the renovation of dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! warning
    Rules with `matchCategories` are only applied after extraction of a repository, therefore it can not be used to completely prevent analyzes of a repository.
    Still it can be used to prevent or change the renovation of dependencies.
```

The admonition needs _four_ spaces here as well. 😉
